Adding rag evaluation application (#489)
NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints/rag: scripts/eval/README.md

```bash
uv sync --extra rag-eval
```

Run the evaluator without activating a venv:

```bash
uv run --extra rag-eval python scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py --help
```

Alternatively, after running `uv sync --extra rag-eval`, use your environment’s python to execute the same script path.

## Accepted dataset format

Use evaluate_rag.py as the driver. Invoke it with one or more dataset root directories via --dataset-paths. It does not support dataset names, only filesystem paths.

`evaluate_rag.py` validates each dataset root with `validate_dataset_roots():`

- The path must be a directory.
- A `corpus\` directory must exist (documents to ingest are discovered recursively under it).
- A `train.json` file must exist, be a regular file, and contain UTF-8 JSON (see shapes below).

If ingestion is not skipped, every file under corpus/ that is not already marked as ingested for the target collection will be uploaded. Use the same collection name that the eval run will query (by default, the dataset directory’s basename, unless you pass `--collection`).

### Converting external benchmarks into this layout

> When importing a dataset from elsewhere (hosted catalogs, JSONL, CSV, APIs, etc.), materialize `corpus/` as PDF whenever possible—export or print sources to PDF so the bundle matches common document RAG and the default `--file-type pdf` (including PDF page metrics during ingest).

Reviewer: > corpus/` as PDF whenever possible—export or print 

We do support ingesting txt files as well...right? 
It should be like all the data needs to be ingested should be in `corpus` directory. Can you once confirm as well that we are not limiting none pdf file ingestion.

Author: This is not for ingestion. This is written for converting the external dataset to appropriate format.

# RAG evaluation scripts

> Scripts in this folder benchmark an already deployed RAG stack. They ingest a local dataset into the ingestor, call the RAG server’s generate API for each question, and then score the answers with RAGAS using the [NVIDIA metrics](https://docs.ragas.io/en/stable/concepts/metrics/available_metrics/nvidia_metrics/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scripts in this folder benchmark a deployed RAG stack. They load a local dataset into the ingestor, send each question to the RAG server’s generate API, and evaluate the responses using RAGAS with [NVIDIA metrics](https://docs.ragas.io/en/stable/concepts/metrics/available_metrics/nvidia_metrics/).
```

## Prerequisites

- The RAG server and ingestor server must be accessible on the network (for example, after completing the [Quickstart: self-hosted Docker](../../docs/deploy-docker-self-hosted.md)).
- Set `NVIDIA_API_KEY` in the environment; it is required for `langchain_nvidia_ai_endpoints` to run the RAGAS judge.
- `RAG_EVAL_JUDGE_MODEL` (optional) — LLM id passed to `ChatNVIDIA` for RAGAS scoring; defaults to `mistralai/mixtral-8x22b-instruct-v0.1` when unset or empty.

## Install (this repository)

From the repository root, sync and run with uv’s `--project` flag pointing at this folder:

```bash
uv sync --project scripts/eval
uv run --project scripts/eval python scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py --help
```

Or work inside `scripts/eval` (creates `.venv` next to `pyproject.toml`):

```bash
cd scripts/eval
uv sync
uv run python evaluate_rag.py --help
```

Use the same `--project scripts/eval` / `cd scripts/eval` pattern for every command below when invoking `evaluate_rag.py`.

## Accepted dataset format

> Use evaluate_rag.py as the driver. Invoke it with one or more dataset root directories via --dataset-paths. It does not support dataset names, only filesystem paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `evaluate_rag.py` as the driver. Invoke it with one or more dataset root directories via `--dataset-paths`. It does not support dataset names, only filesystem paths.
```

Each item in `contexts` should include the `filename` and `text` fields:

- `filename` — stem of the source file under `corpus/` (no extension), e.g. `COMPANY_2020_10K` for `COMPANY_2020_10K.pdf`.
- `text` — the span tied to that file (page, snippet, or chunk text).

```json
"contexts": [
  {
    "filename": "COMPANY_2020_10K",
    "text": "…"
  }
]
```

Multiple objects are allowed when several spans or files apply. A legacy shape of plain strings (`["…", "…"]`) is also valid for simple bundles where a file stem is not needed.

Minimal example:

```json
[
  {
    "id": "q1",
    "question": "What is the corporate tax rate in the United States?",
    "answer": "21%"
  }
]
```

Corpus files should be the documents you want indexed; prefer PDF when building the bundle from external data, especially when upstream references omit a file extension. Naming must stay consistent with how your ingestor stores `document_name` (citation parsing matches streamed citation results using basenames).

### Ingestion: `--file-type`

> Default is `pdf`. If the converted corpus is mostly PDFs (recommended when preparing benchmarks, including when you materialize sources from links without explicit extensions), leave defaults or pass `--file-type pdf`; the substring `pdf` enables PDF page counts in ingestion metrics. For non-PDF corpora, use values such as `txt` or `txt,html` so they match what is under `corpus/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default value is `pdf`. If the converted corpus is mostly PDFs (recommended when preparing benchmarks, including when you materialize sources from links without explicit extensions), leave defaults or pass `--file-type pdf`; the substring `pdf` enables PDF page counts in ingestion metrics. For non-PDF corpora, use values such as `txt` or `txt,html` so they match what is under `corpus/`.
```

### Checklist

1. Dataset path is a directory containing `corpus/` and `train.json`.
2. `train.json` is valid JSON: **array** of objects (top-level dict / multi-turn bundles are rejected).
3. Every turn / row has `question` and `answer` where you need judge scores.
4. `corpus/` holds the files you intend to retrieve against.

> 5. `NVIDIA_API_KEY` is set for cloud judge models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The dataset path is a directory containing `corpus/` and `train.json`.
- `train.json` is valid JSON: array of objects (top-level dict / multi-turn bundles are rejected).
- Every turn / row has `question` and `answer` where you need judge scores.
- `corpus/` holds the files you intend to retrieve against.
- `NVIDIA_API_KEY` is set for cloud judge models.

```

## What gets measured

- Ingestion: time, file counts, and (for PDFs) pages per second — appended to `rag_<label>_evaluation_metrics.json`.
- Quality (RAGAS): [NVIDIA metrics](https://docs.ragas.io/en/stable/concepts/metrics/available_metrics/nvidia_metrics/) from `ragas.metrics` — `AnswerAccuracy` (column `nv_accuracy`), `ContextRelevance` (`nv_context_relevance`), `ResponseGroundedness` (`nv_response_groundedness`); the latter two require non-empty retrieved contexts from the RAG response.
- Token usage: aggregated from streaming generate responses when the server sends `usage` chunks.

> Judge model for RAGAS is read from `RAG_EVAL_JUDGE_MODEL` (default `mistralai/mixtral-8x22b-instruct-v0.1`); see `evaluate_rag.py`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Judge model for RAGAS is read from `RAG_EVAL_JUDGE_MODEL` (default `mistralai/mixtral-8x22b-instruct-v0.1`); see `evaluate_rag.py`.
```

# RAG evaluation scripts

> Scripts in this folder benchmark an already-deployed RAG stack: they can ingest a local **dataset** into the ingestor, call the RAG server’s generate API for each question, then score answers with **RAGAS** using NVIDIA judge metrics defined under `rag_evaluator/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scripts in this folder benchmark an already deployed RAG stack. They ingest a local dataset into the ingestor, call the RAG server’s generate API for each question, and then score the answers using RAGAS with NVIDIA judge metrics defined under `rag_evaluator/`.
```

## Prerequisites

> - **RAG server** and **ingestor server** reachable on the network (for example after [Quickstart: self-hosted Docker](../../docs/deploy-docker-self-hosted.md)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The RAG server and ingestor server must be accessible on the network (for example, after completing the [Quickstart: self-hosted Docker](../../docs/deploy-docker-self-hosted.md)).
```

> - **`NVIDIA_API_KEY`** in the environment — required for `langchain_nvidia_ai_endpoints` (RAGAS judge).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Set `NVIDIA_API_KEY` in the environment; it is required for `langchain_nvidia_ai_endpoints` to run the RAGAS judge.
```

> - **`vdb_endpoint`** and **`embedding_dimension`** must match your deployment (defaults in the script are placeholders; override with flags).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `vdb_endpoint` and `embedding_dimension` must match your deployment; the script defaults are placeholders, so override them using command-line flags.

```

## Install (this repository)

> From the repo root, install the optional **`rag-eval`** extra (RAGAS, PyPDF2, pandas, etc.):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the repo root, install the optional `rag-eval` extra (RAGAS, PyPDF2, pandas, etc.):
```

```bash
uv sync --extra rag-eval
```

Run the evaluator without activating a venv:

```bash
uv run --extra rag-eval python scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py --help
```

> Alternatively, after `uv sync --extra rag-eval`, use your environment’s `python` and run the same script path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, after running `uv sync --extra rag-eval`, use your environment’s python to execute the same script path.
```

## Accepted dataset format

> The driver is `evaluate_rag.py`. You pass one or more **dataset root directories** with `--dataset-paths`. There is no catalog of dataset names: only filesystem paths are accepted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use evaluate_rag.py as the driver. Invoke it with one or more dataset root directories via --dataset-paths. It does not support dataset names, only filesystem paths.
```

`evaluate_rag.py` validates each root with `validate_dataset_roots()`:

- The path must be a **directory**.
- **`corpus/`** must exist and be a directory (documents to ingest are discovered recursively under it).
- **`train.json`** must exist and be a **file** (UTF-8 JSON, see shapes below).

> If ingestion is not skipped, every file under `corpus/` that is not already reported as ingested for the target collection will be uploaded. Use the same **collection name** the eval run will query (default: **basename of the dataset directory**, unless you pass **`--collection`**).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`evaluate_rag.py` validates each dataset root with `validate_dataset_roots():`

- The path must be a directory.
- A `corpus\` directory must exist (documents to ingest are discovered recursively under it).
- A `train.json` file must exist, be a regular file, and contain UTF-8 JSON (see shapes below).

If ingestion is not skipped, every file under corpus/ that is not already marked as ingested for the target collection will be uploaded. Use the same collection name that the eval run will query (by default, the dataset directory’s basename, unless you pass `--collection`).
```

  corpus/                   ← required; source documents (nested dirs allowed)
    doc_a.pdf
    notes.txt
  train.json                ← required; eval questions / gold answers
```

### `train.json` — single-turn (default, no `--multiturn`)

Use a **JSON array** of objects. The script reads these fields from each object:

| Field | Required | Used by evaluator |
|--------|----------|-------------------|
| `question` | Yes | Sent to the RAG server as the user message (per item). |
| `answer` | Yes (for meaningful scores) | Reference for RAGAS judge metrics (`evaluate_result`). |
| `id` or `query_id` | No | If present, stored on the saved eval row for traceability. |
| `contexts` | No | Optional gold contexts as a **JSON array of strings** (`reference_contexts` for RAGAS). |
| Other keys (e.g. `is_impossible`) | No | Ignored by the current driver unless you extend it. |

**Note:** Context relevance and response groundedness compare the model answer to **retrieved contexts from the RAG server**. Gold `contexts` supply **`reference_contexts`** for RAGAS when present. E2E accuracy uses `question`, `answer`, and the model’s answer.

> Minimal example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use a JSON array of objects. The script reads these fields from each object:

| Field              | Required                  | Used by evaluator                                                      |
|--------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `question`         | Yes                       | Sent to the RAG server as the user message for each item.              |
| `answer`           | Yes (for meaningful scores) | Used as the reference for RAGAS judge metrics (`evaluate_result`).   |
| `id` or `query_id` | No                        | If present, stored on the saved eval row for traceability.             |
| `contexts`         | No                        | Optional gold contexts as a JSON array of strings (mapped to `reference_contexts` for RAGAS). |
| Other keys (for example, `is_impossible`) | No | Ignored by the current driver unless you extend it.                    |

Context relevance and response groundedness compare the model answer to the contexts retrieved from the RAG server. Gold `contexts` provide `reference_contexts` for RAGAS when present. E2E accuracy uses `question`, `answer`, and the model’s answer.

Minimal example:
```

```json
[
  {
    "id": "q1",
    "question": "What is the corporate tax rate in the United States?",
    "answer": "21%"
  }
]
```

> Corpus files should be the documents you want indexed; naming should be consistent with how your ingestor stores **`document_name`** (citation parsing uses **basenames** when matching streamed citation results).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Corpus files should be the documents you want indexed, and their naming must be consistent with how your ingestor stores `document_name` (citation parsing matches streamed citation results using basenames).

```

### `train.json` — multi-turn (`--multiturn`)

> Use a **JSON object** whose keys are conversation ids and whose values are **arrays of turns**. Each turn must include **`question`** and **`answer`** (same usage as single-turn). The script replays each conversation in order and keeps prior user/assistant turns in `messages` for the RAG API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use a JSON object where keys are conversation IDs and values are arrays of turns. Each turn must include `question` and `answer` (with the same semantics as the single-turn format). The script replays each conversation in order and preserves prior user and assistant turns in `messages` when calling the RAG API.
```

Example:

```json
{
  "conv_1": [
    { "question": "What year was the company founded?", "answer": "1993" },
    { "question": "Who was the first CEO?", "answer": "Jane Doe" }
  ],
  "conv_2": [
    { "question": "Summarize the refund policy.", "answer": "Full refund within 30 days." }
  ]
}
```

### Ingestion hint: `--file-type`

> String such as `pdf`, `txt`, or `txt,html`. If the value contains the substring **`pdf`**, the script counts PDF pages for ingestion metrics. Match the dominant type under `corpus/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Strings such as `pdf`, `txt`, or `txt,html`. If the value contains the substring `pdf`, the script counts PDF pages for ingestion metrics. Match the dominant type under `corpus/`.
```

### Checklist

1. Dataset path is a directory containing **`corpus/`** and **`train.json`**.
2. **`train.json`** is valid JSON: **array** of objects (single-turn) or **object** of conversation → turns (multi-turn with `--multiturn`).
3. Every turn / row has **`question`** and **`answer`** where you need judge scores.
4. **`corpus/`** holds the files you intend to retrieve against.

> 5. **`NVIDIA_API_KEY`** is set for cloud judge models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Dataset path is a directory containing `corpus/` and `train.json`.
2. `train.json` is valid JSON: array of objects (single-turn) or object of conversation → turns (multi-turn with `--multiturn`).
3. Every turn / row has `question` and `answer` where you need judge scores.
4. `corpus/` holds the files you intend to retrieve against.
5. `NVIDIA_API_KEY` is set for cloud judge models.
```

## What gets measured

- **Ingestion:** time, file counts, and (for PDFs) pages per second — appended to `rag_<label>_evaluation_metrics.json`.
- **Quality (RAGAS):** custom metrics in `rag_evaluator/ragas_metrics.py` — **E2E accuracy**, **context relevance**, **response groundedness** (the latter two require non-empty retrieved contexts from the RAG response).
- **Token usage:** aggregated from streaming generate responses when the server sends `usage` chunks.

Judge model for RAGAS is configured in `evaluate_rag.py` (`JUDGE_MODEL`).

## Main entrypoint

> `evaluate_rag.py` — orchestrates collection check/create, **blocking** bulk upload to the ingestor (no async task polling in this client), parallel queries to **`/v1/generate`**, then RAGAS evaluation and JSON exports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`evaluate_rag.py` — orchestrates collection check/create, blocking bulk upload to the ingestor (no async task polling in this client), parallel queries to `/v1/generate`, then RAGAS evaluation and JSON exports.
```

  --embedding_dimension 2048 \
  --output_dir results
```

### Example: skip ingestion (collection already populated)

```bash
uv run --extra rag-eval python scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py \
  --dataset-paths /path/to/my_dataset \
  --host localhost \
  --port 8081 \
  --ingestor_server_url http://localhost:8082 \
  --vdb_endpoint http://localhost:19530 \
  --embedding_dimension 2048 \
  --skip_ingestion \
  --output_dir results
```

### Useful flags

| Flag | Notes |
|------|--------|
| `--collection` | Override collection name (default: dataset folder name). |
| `--skip_ingestion` / `--skip_evaluation` | Partial runs. |
| `--force_ingestion` | Deletes the collection first, then re-ingests. |
| `--delete_collection` | Deletes the collection after the run. |
| `--top_k` | Sent as `reranker_top_k` when set. |
| `--vdb_top_k` | Vector DB candidate pool when set. |
| `--model` / `--llm_endpoint` | Optional overrides passed to generate (omit to use server defaults). |
| `--batch_size` | Ingestion batch size (server max applies). |
| `--thread` | Parallelism for queries (and related work). |
| `--timeout` | RAG HTTP timeout seconds (default 180). |

> Document uploads use **`blocking: true`**. The client does **not** send `split_options`; chunk size and overlap follow the **ingestor server configuration**. The ingestor URL you pass is normalized to include the **`v1`** API prefix internally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Document uploads use `blocking: true`. The client does not send `split_options`; chunk size and overlap follow the ingestor server configuration. The ingestor URL you pass is normalized to include the `v1` API prefix internally.
```
